THE FIG TREE PROVIDED A STRIKING LESSON FOR THE DISCIPLES. Just as its fruitfulness was a sign of its health, so fruitfulness was a sign of Israel’s faithfulness to the covenantal standards. Now that Israel, especially represented by its religious leadership, had perverted temple practices and had not repented at the appearance of Jesus Messiah proclaiming the arrival of the kingdom of heaven, Israel was being judged by God.
Jesus’ cursing the fig tree was not a fit of temper but a symbolic act, demonstrating that God’s creatures must produce that for which they were created. Even so we humans have been created by God to carry out his will, which means first of all entering into a relationship with him, which will then allow us to bear the fruit of that relationship, found especially in the fruit of the Spirit produced in our lives (cf. Gal. 4:6–7; 5:13–26). With the empowering of God’s Spirit, whatever he calls for us to do we can accomplish in his power, if we only will submit to his will.

—ZIBBC

Admittedly this is a strange story, subject to confusion and misunderstanding. Viewed from the vantage point of contemporary psychology, Jesus potentially comes across as impetuous and destructive, not to mention ecologically insensitive. In Matthew’s context, however, this is not the story of a rash Jesus dragged by his hunger into an impulsive tantrum; this is an enacted parable of God’s judgment.
What Jesus does this day on the road into Jerusalem is, in a sense, a reprise of what he did in the temple the day before. When Jesus demonstrated the judgment of God by overturning the tables in the temple courtyard, he cited a prophetic cry of Jeremiah to the effect that the temple had become a “den of robbers” (Jer. 7:11). In the very next chapter of Jeremiah, the prophet continues the lament over the failings of God’s own people: “When I wanted to gather them, says the Lord, there are no grapes on the vine, nor figs on the fig tree” (Jer. 8:13). Matthew’s first readers would recognize that fig tree with no fruit not as an unlucky plant that happened to be in the wrong place at the wrong time but as a prophetic symbol of barren Jerusalem, of God’s own people who resist what God is doing in the world.
The instant withering of the barren tree seems, of course, fearsome bad news, but, in the theological worldview of Matthew, it is actually quite good news. If we allow the symbolism to take hold and see the fig tree as a sign, first, of the holy but barren city of Jerusalem resisting the ministry of Jesus, but, beyond this, as representative of all that appears to offer nourishment, justice, and hope but finally gives only bitter disappointment, for all that seems to serve the saving and merciful purposes of God but is actually all show, then the act of withering becomes an announcement of God’s promise for the redemption of all creation. Nothing that stands in the way of God’s salvation will stand; only that which is good and fruitful, saving and merciful will endure.
The good news aspect of this story is underscored by Jesus’ statement to the disciples about faith and prayer (Matt. 21:21–22). The theological point is that the church can trust the promises of God, can have confidence that God’s saving purpose will prevail. Therefore, Jesus’ followers can give evil and hatred a withering glare and can boldly head out to do the work of the kingdom even when seemingly insurmountable mountains stand in the way. They can take up causes every wise social critic says are hopeless. They can plant works of healing, peace, mercy, and justice even when every other tree on the lot is barren. They can go, as all must go, to the open grave and sneer in the barren face of death, saying to a mountain of grief, “Christ is the resurrection and the life! Despair be cast into the sea.”

—Thomas Long

